Enough about the shorthands, let's go back to code.
I will remove the margin border
and for now also the padding of the product overview.
So if we save this and reload, we're back to where we were, well with one difference,
we no longer have the margin implied by the body, that whitespace to the top is coming from the h1 element.
Now we can also set something different,
we can set a width and a height. So on that product overview, we can set the width to 100% for example,
to tell it to take the full entire width of this page.
Now if we reload, we don't really see a change because that was its default behavior anyways because
sections like divs or like h1 elements are block level elements. Now this is some HTML feature not related
to CSS but it's important to keep in mind,
block level elements unlike inline elements like anchor tags for example, block level elements always
take the full available width by default.
So width 100% actually doesn't do anything,
if we set it something different than 100% though, let's say to 50, then we can see that if we reload,
this shrinks our box to 50% of the width of the surrounding container.
Here it looks like 50% of the page width and it is the case but that's simply happening because
the surrounding container is a main element, which also is a block level element, which therefore has
a width of 100%. So 50% of the surrounding container which has 100% of the page width
yields 50% of the page width here too but if the main element had a lower width too, then the section would
only get half of that.
So width can be used either with percentages or of course with absolute values, like 300 pixels.
This is also possible
and this shrinks the box,
if I increase that to let's say 700,
you'll see it gets bigger, like that.
So this is the width we can set and this will become important throughout the course because we don't want
all elements to be 100% of the page width,
we can also set the height of course. Now for the height,
it's tricky, if you set height 100% and you expect it to now get the height of the full page, well
you're going to be sad, as you can see, it now only got a little bit bigger,
the only thing it now does is it includes the height of the margin, of the h1 element.
The reason for that is that 100% refers to the available height given by the parent container.
Now if you hover over the main container, you could see the blue area is much bigger than the tiny
bit on a red box grow by
but that area, that height of the main element is calculated dynamically by the content it holds,
so it's only as big as its content requires it to be.
Now that of course creates kind of an infinite loop, if we say a part of the content should be 100%
of the size of the main area and the main area says I'm only as big as I need to be, then the 100%
basically has no effect.
If you wanted it to have an effect, you would need to change the height of the main area too.
So if I do this here in the developer tools which only will change it temporarily until we refresh
the page, I could set the height of the main area to let's say 500 pixels
and if we do that, you can inspect the section here and you will see on the top left you can see it,
that it now has a height of 500 pixels,
exactly the height we set on the main area.
So if we give this an explicit height, then the child, if we use percentages, we'll again refer to that
just as it's the case with the width. If we set the height of the main area to 100%, we're now referring
to its parent which is the body
and that again is only as big as it needs to be,
so we got the same situation as before.
So only if we set the body to height 100% too and we do the same for HTML which is the parent
of the body, which is only as big as it needs to be,
so now if we set this to 100% on HTML too, now we finally get a red area that is just as
big as our page because now starting at the HTML element which now refers to the overall window
if we set height to 100%, we pass the relative height of 100% down to that section.
So if you ever want to style the height of an element relative to the height of your page, you need to
create such a chain where you pass the page height down. In the dimensions and units section later in the course,
we'll also learn about a different more modern unit which allows you to achieve this a bit easier, with
worse browser support though
but for now, this is a cool trick to keep in mind, how you can set the height to 100%.
Now this is not necessarily what I want to do here though, I can simply set this to an absolute value,
for example we could set this to a value of let's say 528 pixels, if we now reload, this is the size
our red area has. I'll also set the width back to 100%,
though I could omit this because that's the default anyways
but for now, I'll leave it here so that we have that for reference.
So that is how width and height work in general, we can use them with percentages or pixels or other
units which we'll cover later
but there's actually a bit more to width and height especially if we consider the box model.
Let's dive into that in the next lecture.